<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="act-1-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<p>The Garden of Eden. Afternoon. An immense <b epub:type="z3998:persona">serpent</b> is sleeping with her head buried in a thick bed of Johnswort, and her body coiled in apparently endless rings through the branches of a tree, which is already well grown; for the days of creation have been longer than our reckoning. She is not yet visible to anyone unaware of her presence, as her colors of green and brown make a perfect camouflage. Near her head a low rock shows above the Johnswort.</p>
			<p>The rock and tree are on the border of a glade in which lies a dead fawn all awry, its neck being broken. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</b>, crouching with one hand on the rock, is staring in consternation at the dead body. He has not noticed the serpent on his left hand. He turns his face to his right and calls excitedly.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Eve! Eve!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve's Voice</td>
						<td>What is it, Adam?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Come here. Quick. Something has happened.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Running in.</i> What? Where? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</b> points to the fawn.</i> Oh! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She goes to it; and he is emboldened to go with her.</i> What is the matter with its eyes?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>It is not only its eyes. Look. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He kicks it.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Oh don't! Why doesn't it wake?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>I don't know. It is not asleep.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Not asleep?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Try.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trying to shake it and roll it over.</i> It is stiff and cold.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Nothing will wake it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>It has a queer smell. Pah! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She dusts her hands, and draws away from it.</i> Did you find it like that?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>No. It was playing about; and it tripped and went head over heels. It never stirred again. Its neck is wrong <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He stoops to lift the neck and show her.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Don't touch it. Come away from it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They both retreat, and contemplate it from a few steps' distance with growing repulsion.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Adam.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Yes?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Suppose you were to trip and fall, would you go like that?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Ugh! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He shudders and sits down on the rock.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Throwing herself on the ground beside him, and grasping his knee.</i> You must be careful. Promise me you will be careful.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>What is the good of being careful? We have to live here forever. Think of what forever means! Sooner or later I shall trip and fall. It may be tomorrow; it may be after as many days as there are leaves in the garden and grains of sand by the river. No matter: some day I shall forget and stumble.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I too.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Horrified.</i> Oh no, no. I should be alone. Alone forever. You must never put yourself in danger of stumbling. You must not move about. You must sit still. I will take care of you and bring you what you want.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turning away from him with a shrug, and hugging her ankles.</i> I should soon get tired of that. Besides, if it happened to you, <em>I</em> should be alone. I could not sit still then. And at last it would happen to me too.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>And then?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Then we should be no more. There would be only the things on all fours, and the birds, and the snakes.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>That must not be.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Yes: that must not be. But it might be.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>No. I tell you it must not be. I know that it must not be.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>We both know it. How do we know it?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>There is a voice in the garden that tells me things.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>The garden is full of voices sometimes. They put all sorts of thoughts into my head.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>To me there is only one voice. It is very low; but it is so near that it is like a whisper from within myself. There is no mistaking it for any voice of the birds or beasts, or for your voice.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>It is strange that I should hear voices from all sides and you only one from within. But I have some thoughts that come from within me and not from the voices. The thought that we must not cease to be comes from within.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Despairingly.</i> But we shall cease to be. We shall fall like the fawn and be broken. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising and moving about in his agitation.</i> I cannot bear this knowledge. I will not have it. It must not be, I tell you. Yet I do not know how to prevent it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>That is just what I feel; but it is very strange that you should say so: there is no pleasing you. You change your mind so often.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Scolding her.</i> Why do you say that? How have I changed my mind?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>You say we must not cease to exist. But you used to complain of having to exist always and forever. You sometimes sit for hours brooding and silent, hating me in your heart. When I ask you what I have done to you, you say you are not thinking of me, but of the horror of having to be here forever. But I know very well that what you mean is the horror of having to be here with me forever.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Oh! That is what you think, is it? Well, you are wrong. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He sits down again, sulkily.</i> It is the horror of having to be with myself forever. I like you; but I do not like myself. I want to be different; to be better, to begin again and again; to shed myself as a snake sheds its skin. I am tired of myself. And yet I must endure myself, not for a day or for many days, but forever. That is a dreadful thought. That is what makes me sit brooding and silent and hateful. Do you never think of that?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>No: I do not think about myself: what is the use? I am what I am: nothing can alter that. I think about you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>You should not. You are always spying on me. I can never be alone. You always want to know what I have been doing. It is a burden. You should try to have an existence of your own, instead of occupying yourself with my existence.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I <em>have</em> to think about you. You are lazy: you are dirty: you neglect yourself: you are always dreaming: you would eat bad food and become disgusting if I did not watch you and occupy myself with you. And now some day, in spite of all my care, you will fall on your head and become dead.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Dead? What word is that?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pointing to the fawn.</i> Like that. I call it dead.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising and approaching it slowly.</i> There is something uncanny about it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Joining him.</i> Oh! It is changing into little white worms.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Throw it into the river. It is unbearable.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I dare not touch it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Then I must, though I loathe it. It is poisoning the air. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He gathers its hooves in his hand and carries it away in the direction from which <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</b> came, holding it as far from him as possible.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</b> looks after them for a moment; then, with a shiver of disgust, sits down on the rock, brooding. The body of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the serpent</b> becomes visible, glowing with wonderful new colors. She rears her head slowly from the bed of Johnswort, and speaks into <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve's</b> ear in a strange seductively musical whisper.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Eve.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Startled.</i> Who is that?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>It is I. I have come to show you my beautiful new hood. See! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She spreads a magnificent amethystine hood.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Admiring it.</i> Oh! But who taught you to speak?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>You and Adam. I have crept through the grass, and hidden, and listened to you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>That was wonderfully clever of you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>I am the most subtle of all the creatures of the field.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Your hood is most lovely. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She strokes it and pets <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the serpent</b>.</i> Pretty thing! Do you love your godmother Eve?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>I adore her. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She licks <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve's</b> neck with her double tongue.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Petting her.</i> Eve's wonderful darling snake. Eve will never be lonely now that her snake can talk to her.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Snake</td>
						<td>I can talk of many things. I am very wise. It was I who whispered the word to you that you did not know. Dead. Death. Die.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Shuddering.</i> Why do you remind me of it? I forgot it when I saw your beautiful hood. You must not remind me of unhappy things.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Death is not an unhappy thing when you have learnt how to conquer it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>How can I conquer it?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>By another thing, called birth.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>What? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trying to pronounce it.</i> B-birth?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Yes, birth.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>What is birth?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>The serpent never dies. Some day you shall see me come out of this beautiful skin, a new snake with a new and lovelier skin. That is birth.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I have seen that. It is wonderful.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>If I can do that, what can I not do? I tell you I am very subtle. When you and Adam talk, I hear you say 'Why?' Always 'Why?' You see things; and you say 'Why?' But I dream things that never were; and I say 'Why not?' I made the word dead to describe my old skin that I cast when I am renewed. I call that renewal being born.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Born is a beautiful word.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Why not be born again and again as I am, new and beautiful every time?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I! It does not happen: that is why.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>That is how; but it is not why. Why not?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>But I should not like it. It would be nice to be new again; but my old skin would lie on the ground looking just like me; and Adam would see it shrivel up and—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>No. He need not. There is a second birth.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>A second birth?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Listen. I will tell you a great secret. I am very subtle; and I have thought and thought and thought. And I am very wilful, and must have what I want; and I have willed and willed and willed. And I have eaten strange things: stones and apples that you are afraid to eat.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>You dared!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>I dared everything. And at last I found a way of gathering together a part of the life in my body—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>What is the life?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>That which makes the difference between the dead fawn and the live one.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>What a beautiful word! And what a wonderful thing! Life is the loveliest of all the new words.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Yes: it was by meditating on Life that I gained the power to do miracles.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Miracles? Another new word.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>A miracle is an impossible thing that is nevertheless possible. Something that never could happen, and yet does happen.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Tell me some miracle that you have done.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>I gathered a part of the life in my body, and shut it into a tiny white case made of the stones I had eaten.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>And what good was that?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>I showed the little case to the sun, and left it in its warmth. And it burst; and a little snake came out; and it became bigger and bigger from day to day until it was as big as I. That was the second birth.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Oh! That is too wonderful. It stirs inside me. It hurts.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>It nearly tore me asunder. Yet I am alive, and can burst my skin and renew myself as before. Soon there will be as many snakes in Eden as there are scales on my body. Then death will not matter: this snake and that snake will die; but the snakes will live.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>But the rest of us will die sooner or later, like the fawn. And then there will be nothing but snakes, snakes, snakes everywhere.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>That must not be. I worship you, Eve. I must have something to worship. Something quite different to myself, like you. There must be something greater than the snake.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Yes: it must not be. Adam must not perish. You are very subtle: tell me what to do.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Think. Will. Eat the dust. Lick the white stone: bite the apple you dread. The sun will give life.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I do not trust the sun. I will give life myself. I will tear. another Adam from my body if I tear my body to pieces in the act.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Do. Dare it. Everything is possible: everything. Listen. I am old. I am the old serpent, older than Adam, older than Eve. I remember Lilith, who came before Adam and Eve. I was her darling as I am yours. She was alone: there was no man with her. She saw death as you saw it when the fawn fell; and she knew then that she must find out how to renew herself and cast the skin like me. She had a mighty will: she strove and strove and willed and willed for more moons than there are leaves on all the trees of the garden. Her pangs were terrible: her groans drove sleep from Eden. She said it must never be again: that the burden of renewing life was past bearing: that it was too much for one. And when she cast the skin, lo! there was not one new Lilith but two: one like herself, the other like Adam. You were the one: Adam was the other.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>But why did she divide into two, and make us different?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>I tell you the labor is too much for one. Two must share it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Do you mean that Adam must share it with me? He will not. He cannot bear pain, nor take trouble with his body.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>He need not. There will be no pain for him. He will implore you to let him do his share. He will be in your power through his desire.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Then I will do it. But how? How did Lilith work this miracle?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>She imagined it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>What is imagined?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>She told it to me as a marvellous story of something that never happened to a Lilith that never was. She did not know then that imagination is the beginning of creation. You imagine what you desire; you will what you imagine; and at last you create what you will.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>How can I create out of nothing?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Everything must have been created out of nothing. Look at that thick roll of hard flesh on your strong arm! That was not always there: you could not climb a tree when I first saw you. But you willed and tried and willed and tried; and your will created out of nothing the roll on your arm until you had your desire, and could draw yourself up with one hand and seat yourself on the bough that was above your head.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>That was practice.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Things wear out by practice: they do not grow by it. Your hair streams in the wind as if it were trying to stretch itself further and further. But it does not grow longer for all its practice in streaming, because you have not willed it so. When Lilith told me what she had imagined in our silent language (for there were no words then) I bade her desire it and will it; and then, to our great wonder, the thing she had desired and willed created itself in her under the urging of her will. Then I too willed to renew myself as two instead of one; and after many days the miracle happened, and I burst from my skin another snake interlaced with me; and now there are two imaginations, two desires, two wills to create with.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>To desire, to imagine, to will, to create. That is too long a story. Find me one word for it all: you, who are so clever at words.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>In one word, to conceive. That is the word that means both the beginning in imagination and the end in creation.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Find me a word for the story Lilith imagined and told you in your silent language: the story that was too wonderful to be true, and yet came true.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>A poem.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Find me another word for what Lilith was to me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>She was your mother.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>And Adam's mother?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Yes.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">About to rise.</i> I will go and tell Adam to conceive.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i> !!!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Jarred and startled.</i> What a hateful noise! What is the matter with you? No one has ever uttered such a sound before.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Adam cannot conceive.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Why?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Lilith did not imagine him so. He can imagine: he can will: he can desire: he can gather his life together for a great spring towards creation: he can create all things except one; and that one is his own kind.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Why did Lilith keep this from him?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Because if he could do that he could do without Eve.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>That is true. It is I who must conceive.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Yes. By that he is tied to you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>And I to him!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Yes, until you create another Adam.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I had not thought of that. You are very subtle. But if I create another Eve he may turn to her and do without me. I will not create any Eves, only Adams.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>They cannot renew themselves without Eves. Sooner or later you will die like the fawn; and the new Adams will be unable to create without new Eves. You can imagine such an end; but you cannot desire it, therefore cannot will it, therefore cannot create Adams only.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>If I am to die like the fawn, why should not the rest die too? What do I care?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Life must not cease. That comes before everything. It is silly to say you do not care. You do care. It is that care that will prompt your imagination; inflame your desires; make your will irresistible; and create out of nothing.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Thoughtfully.</i> There can be no such thing as nothing. The garden is full, not empty.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>I had not thought of that. That is a great thought. Yes: there is no such thing as nothing, only things we cannot see. The chameleon eats the air.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I have another thought: I must tell it to Adam. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Calling.</i> Adam! Adam! Coo-ee!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam's Voice</td>
						<td>Coo-ee!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>This will please him, and cure his fits of melancholy.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Do not tell him yet. I have not told you the great secret.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>What more is there to tell? It is I who have to do the miracle.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>No: he, too, must desire and will. But he must give his desire and his will to you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>How?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>That is the great secret. Hush! he is coming.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Returning.</i> Is there another voice in the garden besides our voices and the Voice? I heard a new voice.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising and running to him.</i> Only think, Adam! Our snake has learnt to speak by listening to us.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Delighted.</i> Is it so? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He goes past her to the stone, and fondles <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the serpent</b>.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Responding affectionately.</i> It is so, dear Adam.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>But I have more wonderful news than that. Adam: we need not live forever.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Dropping <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the snake's</b> head in his excitement.</i> What! Eve: do not play with me about this. If only there may be an end some day, and yet no end! If only I can be relieved of the horror of having to endure myself forever! If only the care of this terrible garden may pass on to some other gardener! If only the sentinel set by the Voice can be relieved! If only the rest and sleep that enable me to bear it from day to day could grow after many days into an eternal rest, an eternal sleep, then I could face my days, however long they may last. Only, there must be some end, some end: I am not strong enough to bear eternity.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>You need not live to see another summer; and yet there shall be no end.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>That cannot be.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>It can be.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>It shall be.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>It is. Kill me; and you will find another snake in the garden tomorrow. You will find more snakes than there are fingers on your hands.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I will make other Adams, other Eves.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>I tell you you must not make up stories about this. It cannot happen.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>I can remember when you were yourself a thing that could not happen. Yet you are.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Struck.</i> That must be true. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He sits down on the stone.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>I will tell Eve the secret; and she will tell it to you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>The secret! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He turns quickly towards <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the serpent</b>, and in doing so puts his foot on something sharp.</i> Oh!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>What is it?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rubbing his foot.</i> A thistle. And there, next to it, a briar. And nettles, too! I am tired of pulling these things up to keep the garden pleasant for us forever.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>They do not grow very fast. They will not overrun the whole garden for a long time: not until you have laid down your burden and gone to sleep forever. Why should you trouble yourself? Let the new Adams clear a place for themselves.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>That is very true. You must tell us your secret. You see, Eve, what a splendid thing it is not to have to live forever.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Throwing herself down discontentedly and plucking at the grass.</i> That is so like a man. The moment you find we need not last forever, you talk as if we were going to end today. You must clear away some of those horrid things, or we shall be scratched and stung whenever we forget to look where we are stepping.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Oh yes, some of them, of course. But only some. I will clear them away tomorrow.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i> !!!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>That is a funny noise to make. I like it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I do not. Why do you make it again?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Adam has invented something new. He has invented tomorrow. You will invent things every day now that the burden of immortality is lifted from you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Immortality? What is that?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>My new word for having to live forever.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>The serpent has made a beautiful word for being. Living.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Make me a beautiful word for doing things tomorrow; for that surely is a great and blessed invention.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Procrastination.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>That is a sweet word. I wish I had a serpent's tongue.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>That may come too. Everything is possible.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Springing up in sudden terror.</i> Oh!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>What is the matter now?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>My rest! My escape from life!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Death. That is the word.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>There is a terrible danger in this procrastination.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>What danger?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>If I put off death until tomorrow, I shall never die. There is no such day as tomorrow, and never can be.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>I am very subtle; but Man is deeper in his thought than I am. The woman knows that there is no such thing as nothing: the man knows that there is no such day as tomorrow. I do well to worship them.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>If I am to overtake death, I must appoint a real day, not a tomorrow. When shall I die?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>You may die when I have made another Adam. Not before. But then, as soon as you like. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She rises, and passing behind him, strolls off carelessly to the tree and leans against it, stroking a ring of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the snake</b>.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>There need be no hurry even then.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I see you will put it off until tomorrow.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>And you? Will you die the moment you have made a new Eve?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Why should I? Are you eager to be rid of me? Only just now you wanted me to sit still and never move lest I should stumble and die like the fawn. Now you no longer care.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>It does not matter so much now.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Angrily to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the snake</b>.</i> This death that you have brought into the garden is an evil thing. He wants me to die.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</b>.</i> Do you want her to die?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>No. It is I who am to die. Eve must not die before me. I should be lonely.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>You could get one of the new Eves.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>That is true. But they might not be quite the same. They could not: I feel sure of that. They would not have the same memories. They would be—I want a word for them.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Strangers.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Yes: that is a good hard word. Strangers.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>When there are new Adams and new Eves we shall live in a garden of strangers. We shall need each other. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She comes quickly behind him and turns up his face to her.</i> Do not forget that, Adam. Never forget it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Why should I forget it? It is I who have thought of it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I, too, have thought of something. The fawn stumbled and fell and died. But you could come softly up behind me and <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She suddenly pounces on his shoulders and throws him forward on his face.</i> throw me down so that I should die. I should not dare to sleep if there were no reason why you should not make me die.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Scrambling up in horror.</i> Make you die!!! What a frightful thought!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Kill, kill, kill, kill. That is the word.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>The new Adams and Eves might kill us. I shall not make them. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She sits on the rock and pulls him down beside her, clasping him to her with her right arm.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>You must. For if you do not there will be an end.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>No: they will not kill us: they will feel as I do. There is something against it. The Voice in the garden will tell them that they must not kill, as it tells me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>The voice in the garden is your own voice.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>It is; and it is not. It is something greater than me: I am only a part of it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>The Voice does not tell me not to kill you. Yet I do not want you to die before me. No voice is needed to make me feel that.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Throwing his arm round her shoulder with an expression of anguish.</i> Oh no: that is plain without any voice. There is something that holds us together, something that has no word—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Love. Love. Love.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>That is too short a word for so long a thing.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i> !!!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turning impatiently to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the snake</b>.</i> That heart-biting sound again! Do not do it. Why do you do it?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Love may be too long a word for so short a thing soon. But when it is short it will be very sweet.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Ruminating.</i> You puzzle me. My old trouble was heavy; but it was simple. These wonders that you promise to do may tangle up my being before they bring me the gift of death. I was troubled with the burden of eternal being; but I was not confused in my mind. If I did not know that I loved Eve, at least I did not know that she might cease to love me, and come to love some other Adam and desire my death. Can you find a name for that knowledge?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Jealousy. Jealousy. Jealousy.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>A hideous word.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Shaking him.</i> Adam: you must not brood. You think too much.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Angrily.</i> How can I help brooding when the future has become uncertain? Anything is better than uncertainty. Life has become uncertain. Love is uncertain. Have you a word for this new misery?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Fear. Fear. Fear.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Have you a remedy for it?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Yes. Hope. Hope. Hope.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>What is hope?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>As long as you do not know the future you do not know that it will not be happier than the past. That is hope.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>It does not console me. Fear is stronger in me than hope. I must have certainty. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He rises threateningly.</i> Give it to me; or I will kill you when next I catch you asleep.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Throwing her arms round <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the serpent</b>.</i> My beautiful snake. Oh no. How can you even think such a horror?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Fear will drive me to anything. The serpent gave me fear. Let it now give me certainty or go in fear of me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Bind the future by your will. Make a vow.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>What is a vow?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Choose a day for your death; and resolve to die on that day. Then death is no longer uncertain but certain. Let Eve vow to love you until your death. Then love will be no longer uncertain.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Yes: that is splendid: that will bind the future.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Displeased, turning away from <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the serpent</b>.</i> But it will destroy hope.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Angrily.</i> Be silent, woman. Hope is wicked. Happiness is wicked. Certainty is blessed.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>What is wicked? You have invented a word.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Whatever I fear to do is wicked. Listen to me, Eve; and you, snake, listen too, that your memory may hold my vow. I will live a thousand sets of the four seasons—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>Years. Years.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>I will live a thousand years; and then I will endure no more: I will die and take my rest. And I will love Eve all that time and no other woman.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>And if Adam keeps his vow I will love no other man until he dies.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>You have both invented marriage. And what he will be to you and not to any other woman is husband; and what you will be to him and not to any other man is wife.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Instinctively moving his hand towards her.</i> Husband and wife.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Slipping her hand into his.</i> Wife and husband.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i> !!!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Snatching herself loose from <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</b>.</i> Do not make that odious noise, I tell you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Do not listen to her: the noise is good: it lightens my heart. You are a jolly snake. But you have not made a vow yet. What vow do you make?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>I make no vows. I take my chance.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Chance? What does that mean?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td>It means that I fear certainty as you fear uncertainty. It means that nothing is certain but uncertainty. If I bind the future I bind my will. If I bind my will I strangle creation.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Creation must not be strangled. I tell you I will create, though I tear myself to pieces in the act.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>Be silent, both of you. I <em>will</em> bind the future. I will be delivered from fear. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</b></i> We have made our vows; and if you must create, you shall create within the bounds of those vows. You shall not listen to that snake any more. Come <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He seizes her by the hair to drag her away.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Let me go, you fool. It has not yet told me the secret.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Releasing her.</i> That is true. What is a fool?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>I do not know: the word came to me. It is what you are when you forget and brood and are filled with fear. Let us listen to the snake.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td>No: I am afraid of it. I feel as if the ground were giving way under my feet when it speaks. Do you stay and listen to it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Serpent</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i> !!!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adam</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Brightening.</i> That noise takes away fear. Funny. The snake and the woman are going to whisper secrets. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He chuckles and goes away slowly, laughing his first laugh.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve</td>
						<td>Now the secret. The secret. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She sits on the rock and throws her arms round <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the serpent</b>, who begins whispering to her.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Eve's</b> face lights up with intense interest, which increases until an expression of overwhelming repugnance takes its place. She buries her face in her hands.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
