<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="act-4-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<p>Inside the temple. A gallery overhanging an abyss. Dead silence. The gallery is brightly lighted; but beyond is a vast gloom, continually changing in intensity. A shaft of violet light shoots upward; and a very harmonious and silvery carillon chimes. When it ceases the violet ray vanishes.</p>
			<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</b> comes along the gallery, followed by <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the Envoy's daughter</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">his wife</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the Envoy</b> himself, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the Elderly Gentleman</b>. The two men are holding their hats with the brims near their noses, as if prepared to pray into them at a moment's notice. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</b> halts: they all follow her example. They contemplate the void with awe. Organ music of the kind called sacred in the nineteenth century begins. Their awe deepens. The violet ray, now a diffused mist, rises again from the abyss.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Wife</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</b>, in a reverent whisper.</i> Shall we kneel?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Loudly.</i> Yes, if you want to. You can stand on your head if you like. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She sits down carelessly on the gallery railing, with her back to the abyss.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Jarred by her callousness.</i> We desire to behave in a becoming manner.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>Very well. Behave just as you feel. It doesn't matter how you behave. But keep your wits about you when the pythoness ascends, or you will forget the questions you have come to ask her.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr class="together">
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">simultaneously</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr class="together">
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Very nervous, takes out a paper to refresh his memory.</i> Ahem!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr class="together">
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Daughter</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarmed.</i> The pythoness. Is she a snake?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>Tch-ch! The priestess of the oracle. A sybil. A prophetess. Not a snake.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Wife</td>
						<td>How awful!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>I'm glad you think so.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Wife</td>
						<td>Oh dear! Don't you think so?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>No. This sort of thing is got up to impress you, not to impress me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>I wish you would let it impress us, then, madam. I am deeply impressed; but you are spoiling the effect.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>You just wait. All this business with colored lights and chords on that old organ is only tomfoolery. Wait till you see the pythoness.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy's wife</b> falls on her knees, and takes refuge in prayer.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Daughter</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trembling.</i> Are we really going to see a woman who has lived three hundred years?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>Stuff! Youd drop dead if a tertiary as much as looked at you. The oracle is only a hundred and seventy; and you'll find it hard enough to stand her.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Daughter</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Piteously.</i> Oh! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">she falls on her knees.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>Whew! Stand by me, Poppa. This is a little more than I bargained for. Are you going to kneel; or how?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>Perhaps it would be in better taste.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The two men kneel.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The vapor of the abyss thickens; and a distant roll of thunder seems to come from its depths. The pythoness, seated on her tripod, rises slowly from it. She has discarded the insulating robe and veil in which she conversed with Napoleon, and is now draped and hooded in voluminous folds of a single piece of grey-white stuff. Something supernatural about her terrifies the beholders, who throw themselves on their faces. Her outline flows and waves: she is almost distinct at moments, and again vague and shadowy: above all, she is larger than life-size, not enough to be measured by the flustered congregation, but enough to affect them with a dreadful sense of her supernaturalness.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>Get up, get up. Do pull yourselves together, you people.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</b> and his family, by shuddering negatively, intimate that it is impossible. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</b> manages to get on his hands and knees.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>Come on, Daddy: you are not afraid. Speak to her. She won't wait here all day for you, you know.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising very deferentially to his feet.</i> Madam: you will excuse my very natural nervousness in addressing, for the first time in my life, a—a—a—a goddess. My friend and relative the Envoy is unhinged. I throw myself upon your indulgence—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Interrupting him intolerantly.</i> Don't throw yourself on anything belonging to her or you will go right through her and break your neck. She isn't solid, like you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>I was speaking figuratively—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>You have been told not to do it. Ask her what you want to know; and be quick about it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Stooping and taking the prostrate Envoy by the shoulders.</i> Ambrose: you must make an effort. You cannot go back to Baghdad without the answers to your questions.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising to his knees.</i> I shall be only too glad to get back alive on any terms. If my legs would support me I'd just do a bunk straight for the ship.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>No, no. Remember: your dignity—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>Dignity be damned! I'm terrified. Take me away, for God's sake.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Producing a brandy flask and taking the cap off.</i> Try some of this. It is still nearly full, thank goodness!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Clutching it and drinking eagerly.</i> Ah! That's better. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He tries to drink again. Finding that he has emptied it, he hands it back to his father-in-law upside down.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Taking it.</i> Great heavens! He has swallowed half-a-pint of neat brandy. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Much perturbed, he screws the cap on again, and pockets the flask.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Staggering to his feet; pulling a paper from his pocket; and speaking with boisterous confidence.</i> Get up, Molly. Up with you, Eth.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The two women rise to their knees.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>What I want to ask is this. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He refers to the paper.</i> Ahem! Civilization has reached a crisis. We are at the parting of the ways. We stand on the brink of the Rubicon. Shall we take the plunge? Already a leaf has been torn out of the book of the Sybil. Shall we wait until the whole volume is consumed? On our right is the crater of the volcano: on our left the precipice. One false step, and we go down to annihilation dragging the whole human race with us. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He pauses for breath.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Recovering his spirits under the familiar stimulus of political oratory.</i> Hear, hear!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>What are you raving about? Ask your question while you have the chance. What is it you want to know?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Patronizing her in the manner of a Premier debating with a very young member of the Opposition.</i> A young woman asks me a question. I am always glad to see the young taking an interest in politics. It is an impatient question; but it is a practical question, an intelligent question. She asks why we seek to lift a corner of the veil that shrouds the future from our feeble vision.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>I don't. I ask you to tell the oracle what you want, and not keep her sitting there all day.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Warmly.</i> Order, order!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>What does 'Order, order!' mean?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>I ask the august oracle to listen to my voice—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>You people seem never to tire of listening to your voices; but it doesn't amuse us. What do you want?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>I want, young woman, to be allowed to proceed without unseemly interruptions.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A low roll of thunder comes from the abyss.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>There! Even the oracle is indignant. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">the Envoy</b></i> Do not allow yourself to be put down by this lady's rude clamor, Ambrose. Take no notice. Proceed.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy's Wife</td>
						<td>I can't bear this much longer, Amby. Remember: I havn't had any brandy.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">His Daughter</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trembling.</i> There are serpents curling in the vapor. I am afraid of the lightning. Finish it, Papa; or I shall die.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sternly.</i> Silence. The destiny of British civilization is at stake. Trust me. I am not afraid. As I was saying—where was I?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>I don't know. Does anybody?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Tactfully.</i> You were just coming to the election, I think.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reassured.</i> Just so. The election. Now what we want to know is this: ought we to dissolve in August, or put it off until next spring?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>Dissolve? In what? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Thunder.</i> Oh! My fault this time. That means that the oracle understands you, and desires me to hold my tongue.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Fervently.</i> I thank the oracle.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Wife</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</b>.</i> Serve you right!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>Before the oracle replies, I should like to be allowed to state a few of the reasons why, in my opinion, the Government should hold on until the spring. In the first—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Terrific lightning and thunder. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</b> is knocked flat; but as he immediately sits up again dazedly it is clear that he is none the worse for the shock. The ladies cower in terror. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy's</b> hat is blown off; but he seizes it just as it quits his temples, and holds it on with both hands. He is recklessly drunk, but quite articulate, as he seldom speaks in public without taking stimulants beforehand.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Taking one hand from his hat to make a gesture of stilling the tempest.</i> That's enough. We know how to take a hint. I'll put the case in three words. I am the leader of the Potterbill party. My party is in power. I am Prime Minister. The Opposition—the Rotterjacks—have won every bye-election for the last six months. They—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Scrambling heatedly to his feet.</i> Not by fair means. By bribery, by misrepresentation, by pandering to the vilest prejudices <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">muttered thunder</i>—I beg your pardon <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">he is silent.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>Never mind the bribery and lies. The oracle knows all about that. The point is that though our five years will not expire until the year after next, our majority will be eaten away at the bye-elections by about Easter. We can't wait: we must start some question that will excite the public, and go to the country on it. But some of us say do it now. Others say wait till the spring. We can't make up our minds one way or the other. Which would you advise?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>But what is the question that is to excite your public?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>That doesn't matter. I don't know yet. We will find a question all right enough. The oracle can foresee the future: we cannot. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Thunder.</i> What does that mean? What have I done now?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Severely.</i> How often must you be told that we cannot foresee the future? There is no such thing as the future until it is the present.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>Allow me to point out, madam, that when the Potterbill party sent to consult the oracle fifteen years ago, the oracle prophesied that the Potterbills would be victorious at the General Election; and they were. So it is evident that the oracle can foresee the future, and is sometimes willing to reveal it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>Quite true. Thank you, Poppa. I appeal now, over your head, young woman, direct to the August Oracle, to repeat the signal favor conferred on my illustrious predecessor, Sir Fuller Eastwind, and to answer me exactly as he was answered.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">The oracle</b> raises her hands to command silence.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
						<td>Sh-sh-sh!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Invisible trombones utter three solemn blasts in the manner of Die Zauberflöte.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>May I—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Quickly.</i> Hush. The oracle is going to speak.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Oracle</td>
						<td>Go home, poor fool.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She vanishes; and the atmosphere changes to prosaic daylight. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</b> comes off the railing; throws off her robe; makes a bundle of it; and tucks it under her arm. The magic and mystery are gone. The women rise to their feet. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy's</b> party stare at one another helplessly.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Zoo</td>
						<td>The same reply, word for word, that your illustrious predecessor, as you call him, got fifteen years ago. You asked for it; and you got it. And just think of all the important questions you might have asked. She would have answered them, you know. It is always like that. I will go and arrange to have you sent home: you can wait for me in the entrance hall <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">she goes out.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>What possessed me to ask for the same answer old Eastwind got?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>But it was not the same answer. The answer to Eastwind was an inspiration to our party for years. It won us the election.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy's Daughter</td>
						<td>I learnt it at school, granpa. It wasn't the same at all. I can repeat it. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She quotes</i> 'When Britain was cradled in the west, the east wind hardened her and made her great. Whilst the east wind prevails Britain shall prosper. The east wind shall wither Britain's enemies in the day of contest. Let the Rotterjacks look to it.'</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>The old man invented that. I see it all. He was a doddering old ass when he came to consult the oracle. The oracle naturally said 'Go home, poor fool.' There was no sense in saying that to me; but as that girl said, I asked for it. What else could the poor old chap do but fake up an answer fit for publication? There were whispers about it; but nobody believed them. I believe them now.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>Oh, I cannot admit that Sir Fuller Eastwind was capable of such a fraud.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>He was capable of anything: I knew his private secretary. And now what are we going to say? You don't suppose I am going back to Baghdad to tell the British Empire that the oracle called me a fool, do you?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>Surely we must tell the truth, however painful it may be to our feelings.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>I am not thinking of my feelings: I am not so selfish as that, thank God. I am thinking of the country: of our party. The truth, as you call it, would put the Rotterjacks in for the next twenty years. It would be the end of me politically. Not that I care for that: I am only too willing to retire if you can find a better man. Don't hesitate on my account.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>No, Ambrose: you are indispensable. There is no one else.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>Very well, then. What are you going to do?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>My dear Ambrose, you are the leader of the party, not I. What are you going to do?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td>I am going to tell the exact truth; that's what I'm going to do. Do you take me for a liar?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Puzzled.</i> Oh. I beg your pardon. I understood you to say—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Envoy</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Cutting him short.</i> You understood me to say that I am going back to Baghdad to tell the British electorate that the oracle repeated to me, word for word, what it said to Sir Fuller Eastwind fifteen years ago. Molly and Ethel can bear me out. So must you, if you are an honest man. Come on.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He goes out, followed by his wife and daughter.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Left alone and shrinking into an old and desolate figure.</i> What am I to do? I am a most perplexed and wretched man. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He falls on his knees, and stretches his hands in entreaty over the abyss.</i> I invoke the oracle. I cannot go back and connive at a blasphemous lie. I implore guidance.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The Pythoness walks in on the gallery behind him, and touches him on the shoulder. Her size is now natural. Her face is hidden by her hood. He flinches as if from an electric shock; turns to her; and cowers, covering his eyes in terror.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>No: not close to me. I'm afraid I can't bear it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Oracle</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With grave pity.</i> Come: look at me. I am my natural size now: what you saw there was only a foolish picture of me thrown on a cloud by a lantern. How can I help you?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>They have gone back to lie about your answer. I cannot go with them. I cannot live among people to whom nothing is real. I have become incapable of it through my stay here. I implore to be allowed to stay.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Oracle</td>
						<td>My friend: if you stay with us you will die of discouragement.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>If I go back I shall die of disgust and despair. I take the nobler risk. I beg you, do not cast me out.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He catches her robe and holds her.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Oracle</td>
						<td>Take care. I have been here one hundred and seventy years. Your death does not mean to me what it means to you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Elderly Gentleman</td>
						<td>It is the meaning of life, not of death, that makes banishment so terrible to me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Oracle</td>
						<td>Be it so, then. You may stay.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She offers him her hands. He grasps them and raises himself a little by clinging to her. She looks steadily into his face. He stiffens; a little convulsion shakes him; his grasp relaxes; and he falls dead.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Oracle</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looking down at the body.</i> Poor shortlived thing! What else could I do for you?</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
